---
layout: post
title: What Is Cinema?
---

Imagine going to a very fancy restaurant for an expensive dinner. You've been told by several famous food critics and chefs that this is one of the greatest restaurants ever. The service is a bit slow so you end up sitting there for three hours. The food is great and the ingredients are timeless. The recipe is fifty years old but it feels familiar and the plating does not look dated. Yet, you wonder if you lack the requisite amount of taste buds to truly appreciate the effort. You feel sated when you leave but you don't feel like you've left with the same life you sat down with. 

The next day, you eat McDonalds for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. 

I watched [Greenland](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt7737786/), [Freaky](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt10919380/), and [A Quiet Place 2](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt8332922/) all in the span of a week[^1]. Before that, I had watched [The Leopard](https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-the-leopard-1963). 

##### The Stakes Are Too Damn Low

While watching the Quiet Place sequel, I realized why I could not bring myself to care about the fate of the Abbott family. The stakes were not real enough. There simply wasn't enough uncertainty in the narrative for me to be invested in what happens next. I was just waiting for the clock to run out. I thought back to the three other movies I had watched earlier in the week. Greenland looks like a disaster movie, but it doesn’t act like one even though it ends like one. Freaky aka Freaky Friday the 13th was made by the same mind that made “Groundhog Day but serial killer.” Another attempt at a fake out but can you truly fool an audience that has sucked on the teat of TV Tropes?

Don't get me wrong. These movies entertained me as I watched them. For all I know, they did what we can all agree movies do: act as escapes. They ask us to imagine what would it be like to witness the end of our home due to a merciless universe. They ask us to imagine what would it be like to switch body & soul with a ghoulishly inventive serial killer. They ask us to imagine what would it be like if the Clickers from The Last of Us took performance-enhancing steroids and invaded our planet. I don’t mean to be dismissive[^2]. They all have several things to say about healthcare in the United States, the idea of a meritocracy in a failing world, queer identity, co-dependent relationships, and families. But how long will I remember them?

The Leopard, released in 1963, considered to be one of the greatest movies ever by Martin Scorsese & Roger Ebert among others, ends with a ballroom sequence lasting 45 minutes, the kind of thing you only see in movies. None of the spoken dialogue in the ballroom scene reflects what is being communicated. The prince, (Burt Lancaster, magnificent) moves from room to room and there is a sadness that follows him like a shadow. It asks us to imagine what it would be like to grow old and fade away as we all must one day. It is a glorious celebration marking the end of an era in a format that most of us can't access anymore.

Martin Scorsese, or Marty as I like to call him, said that the big movie franchises are more like theme parks, and they are not cinema. Marty is right and he can say whatever the hell he wants because he is Marty, and he has done more than most of the people who think he is wrong. I can’t help but think of the prince at the ball when I hear Marty lamenting the state of cinema and the slow death of the individual artist.

Franchise movie making has killed narrative unpredictability for me. The stakes are so much lower if you know that there is going to be a sequel. Your protagonist will never have to encounter the one enemy that we are all guaranteed to encounter in our lives: mortality. Franchise movie making over-indexes on plot because plot moves forward, and plot keeps the money train going.

I find myself craving the complexity and the unpredictability of daily life, the contradictory and the paradoxical and the whimsical ways of human beings, our capacity to love each other and hurt each other, our ability to self-destruct and our struggle against time.

The franchise cares only about propagating itself. As actors age, they are replaced by younger actors or entirely different actors. There is no true death possible for the comic book hero. The characters are just archetypes that can be represented by other characters. The franchise movie has skill and style and even substance of a sort. But it lacks the ability to leave the audience feeling like they discovered a new insight about human nature. It lacks danger and wonder both. It will never ask us what could happen if you were to try and transport a cargo of unstable explosives in South America. It will never ask us how it feels to be terrorized by anonymous tapes that suddenly appear on your doorstep. It will never ask us what it feels like to watch your daughter fall in love with a younger man right before your own eyes.

The patterns will be repeated, finite variations on finite themes. The assembly belt of narrative commodification has been tried and tested and I was once its consumer. 

If you give the people what they want, they will want more of that thing. If that is what you want, good for you. 

What do I want? I want something that expands my sense of what is possible. I want something that does something new with the same sights and sounds. I want something that I can take with me.


[^1]: I also watched No Sudden Move which is not a franchise movie. While No Sudden Move benefits from the stylings of a certain Mr. Soderbergh and a misplaced sense of historical revisionism, it ducks and weaves to a predictable end.

[^2]: Apparently, A Quiet Place spin-off is being planned with Jeff Nichols. I might shrug off my aversion of franchises if Nichols indeed ends up making something. Nichols made two great movies about parenting and fatherhood: Midnight Special and Take Shelter. Midnight Special is probably the finest example of the superhero movie that is not a superhero movie.
