---
layout: post
title: What Is Cinema?
---

Imagine going to the fanciest restaurant (you can imagine) for an expensive dinner. You've been told by several famous food critics and chefs that this is one of the greatest restaurants ever. The service is a bit slow, and you end up sitting there for three hours. The food is great, the ingredients are timeless, their arrangement is familiar but still new. Yet, you wonder if you lack the requisite amount of taste buds to truly appreciate the effort. You feel sated when you leave but you don't feel like you've left with the same life you sat down with. 

The next day, you eat McDonalds for breakfast, lunch, and dinner. 

I watched [No Sudden Move](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt11525644/), [Greenland](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt7737786/), [Freaky](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt10919380/), and [A Quiet Place 2](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt8332922/) all in the span of a week. Before that, I had watched [The Leopard](https://www.rogerebert.com/reviews/great-movie-the-leopard-1963). 

### Header 3

While watching the Quiet Place sequel (entertaining but unnecessary), I realized why I could not bring myself to care about the fate of the Abbott family. The stakes were not real enough. There simply wasn't enough uncertainty in the narrative for me to be invested in what happens next. I was just waiting for the clock to run out. I thought back to the three other movies I had watched earlier in the week. While No Sudden Move benefits from the stylings of a certain Mr. Soderbergh and a misplaced sense of historical revisionism, it ducks and weaves to a predictable end. While Greenland looks like a disaster movie and acts like one, it also ends like one. The moment my friend pointed out that a sequel was already being considered, I knew that nothing bad could befall my oh-so-attractive family of protagonists. Freaky is Freaky Friday the 13th which is not surprising when you find out that it was made by the same mind that made Groundhog Day but serial killer. Another attempt at a fake out but can you truly fool an audience that has sucked on the teat of TV Tropes?

Don't get me wrong. These movies entertained me as I watched them. For all I know, that is all they set out to do (he said facetiously) and they did it successfully (they made money, didn't they?). We can all agree that movies are escapes. They ask us to imagine what would it be like to witness the end of our only home in this universe due to the several conveniently paced impacts of a comet. They ask us to imagine what would it be like to switch body & soul with a ghoulishly inventive serial killer. They ask us to imagine what would it be like if the Clickers from The Last of Us took performance-enhancing steroids and invaded our planet. They all have several interesting things to say about the healthcare system in the United States and the idea of a meritocracy in a failing world, about queer identity and co-dependent relationships, about the families we have and the ones we form. But ultimately, the interests of commerce and franchise movie making diminish any artistic merit they might possess.

The Leopard, released in 1963, considered to be one of the greatest movies ever by Martin Scorsese & Roger Ebert among others, ends with a ballroom sequence lasting 45 minutes. It is one of those things that you can only see at the movies now. It is a glorious celebration marking the end of an era in a format that most of us can't access anymore. None of the spoken dialogue in the ballroom scene reflects what is being communicated. The ball marks the end of something old. The prince, (Burt Lancaster, magnificent) moves from room to room and there is a sadness that follows him like a shadow. I watched the prince sweating, growing uneasy. I watched and I worried that he was going to die. It asks us to imagine what it would be like to grow old and fade away as we all must one day.

Martin Scorsese, or Marty as I like to call him, said that the big movie franchises are more like theme parks, and they are not cinema. Marty is right and he can say whatever the hell he wants because he is Marty and he has done more than most of the people who think he is wrong. 

Franchise movie making has killed narrative unpredictability for me. The stakes are so much lower if you know that there is going to be a sequel. Your protagonist will never have to encounter the one enemy that we are all guaranteed to encounter in our lives: mortality. Aging and death. Franchise movie making over-indexes on plot because plot moves forward and plot drives sequels and plot keeps the money train going. I’m sure someone will point out the character development Thor has had in the Marvel universe as a counter-point. I don’t mean to suggest that the MCU does not have any character development. But the characters in the MCU are archetypes and not people.

I find myself craving the complexity and the unpredictability of daily life, the contradictory and the paradoxical and the whimsical ways of human beings, our capacity to love each other and hurt each other, our ability to self-destruct and to rehabilitate. 

Will time be kind to the movie franchise? I think not. They do not care for longevity the same way that any other artist would. The franchise does not concern itself with art, honestly. It is an industry that cares only about propagating itself. As the actors age, they will be replaced by younger similar actors or even entirely different actors. There is no true death possible for the comic book hero.

The franchise movie has skill and style and even substance of a sort. But it often lacks the ability to leave the audience with an insight about human nature. It lacks a genuine sense of wonder. It lacks a true sense of danger. It will never ask us what could happen if you were to try and transport a cargo of unstable explosives in South America. It will never ask us how does it feel to be terrorized by anonymous tapes that suddenly appear on your doorstep. It will never ask us what it feels like to watch your daughter fall in love with a younger man right before your own eyes. 

If you can enjoy them, please do. I find myself unable to do that now. It is hard for me not to spot the patterns being repeated, the finite variations on finite themes. The assembly belt of narrative commodification has been tried and tested and it has found its audience.

Marty can tell you what this means for the independent filmmaker and what it means for the making of cinema in the future.


My sense of what is possible in telling stories with moving images and sounds is going to be expanded. 

And if you’re going to tell me that it’s simply a matter of supply and demand and giving the people what they want, I’m going to disagree. It’s a chicken-and-egg issue. If people are given only one kind of thing and endlessly sold only one kind of thing, of course they’re going to want more of that one kind of thing.

But, you might argue, can’t they just go home and watch anything else they want on Netflix or iTunes or Hulu? Sure — anywhere but on the big screen, where the filmmaker intended her or his picture to be seen.

In the past 20 years, as we all know, the movie business has changed on all fronts. But the most ominous change has happened stealthily and under cover of night: the gradual but steady elimination of risk. Many films today are perfect products manufactured for immediate consumption. Many of them are well made by teams of talented individuals. All the same, they lack something essential to cinema: the unifying vision of an individual artist. Because, of course, the individual artist is the riskiest factor of all.

PS. Apparently, A Quiet Place spin-off is being planned with Jeff Nichols. I might shrug off my aversion of franchises if Nichols indeed ends up making something. Nichols made two great movies about parenting and fatherhood: Midnight Special and Take Shelter. Midnight Special is probably the finest example of the superhero movie that is not a superhero movie.
